
Assignment_week_28_Jan_PART_1

PROBLEM:
MMV (Mathematical Modeling Virus) is a viral infection that can cause a serious disease (called MMD).
MMD patients are unable to control their natural urge to make mathematical models that attempt to describe 
biological phenomena.

The rapid MMV test gives a positive result:
- 100% of the time for people with the virus
- 5% of the time for people without the virus
- A certain population has a prevalence of 1%

You pick a person from this population at random, and test them, and the test is positive.

1)  What is the probability that they have MMV?

2)  You learn that your friend has a positive rapid test for MMV. What do you tell them?


SOLUTION.Question_1: 
1)  What is the probability that they have MMV?

Assign probabilities to each of these conditions.
These are not mutally exclusive events. This question is one based on conditional probability. 
Baye's Theorem can help! :-)

If we rephrase the questions:
  What is the probability that they have "MMV" given that they get a "positive test"? Or P(A|B)
  
Baye's Theorem:
P(A|B) = P(B|A)*P(A) / P(B)

Where:

P(A) = the chance or probability of having MMV in this particular population
       We already know this is 1% or 1/100
       
P(B) = the chance or probability that you take the test and it return positive for MMV
       This requires combining the probability for BOTH 
       - geting a POSITIVE result when you have MMV (100% positive result)  
       - getting a POSITIVE result when you DON'T have MMV (5% False positive result)
       
P(B|A) = THis is the probability that you test positive for MMV given that you HAVE MMV
        We know that this is 100% or 1       
       
Constructing a table can help visualize the problem (and help with the math!):
If we take a populations of 100 people and apply the above info to our population we can calculate:


            Have MMV    Don't Have MMV    Pop TOTALS
TEST POS    10          49.5              59.5

TEST NEG    0           940.5             940.5

TOTALS      10          990               1000  



So with the table we can now calculate for P(B):
  P(B) = 59.5/1000  = 0.0595

Now we can plug in values into Baye's Theorem:

P(A|B) = (1*0.01)/0.0595 = 0.168

Therefore the probability that this patient had MMV, given that they received a positive test is ~17%



SOLUTION.Question_2:
2)  You learn that your friend has a positive rapid test for MMV. What do you tell them?

Well you could try to console them that their chances were relatively low and that they only had a 17% or very roughly 
a 1 in 6 chance of actually having MMV. 
OR, you could look at the probability associated with receiving a FALSE POSITIVE test for MMV!

IN this case, P(A|B), is calculating the chance they DON'T have MMV given that they get a POSITIVE test result.
P(A|B) = P(B|A)*P(A) / P(B)

Where:

P(A) = Proportion of population testing positive for MMV

P(B) = Proportion of population that does not have MMV

P(B|A) = Proportion of population minus proportion that will test POSITIVE for MMV

P(A|B) = (1-0.17)*(0.0595)/(1-0.001) = 0.0498

You could help raise your friend's spirits by letting them know that the probability of them receiving a FALSE POSITIVE
or, chances that the test result came back wrong for a positive diagnosis of MMV is ~5%. 


NOTE: It's been 25 years since I completed my Probability Course :-) I tried to figure the assignment out a few 
different times using my memories, then read some more of the papers on the reading list (which gave some clues!) 
then started to look online for some resources. I found the followng online resource and then used it to help me 
work through the problems above in my own words. :-)
http://sphweb.bumc.bu.edu/otlt/MPH-Modules/BS/BS704_Probability/BS704_Probability6.html
