Assignment_week_28_jan_part_2



ASSIGNMENT:

Formulate a hypothesis about your data, and discuss how you would test it statistically.


BACKGROUND INFORMATION:

The spawning season for our fish species, S. ocellatus, runs from about the beginning of May to the end of June, or roughly an eight week cycle. We typically process fish during the height of the spawning season (mid May to mid June).

This system has Females and three types of Males with alternative reproductive phenotypes/tactics (Nesting Male, Satellite/Intermediate Male, Sneaker Male). Male tactic is a life history trait that appears to be dependent on amount of growth between annual spawning cycles.

Nesting Males make a nest of algae and invest in Parental Care, and Nest Maintenance and Defence. Satellite Males help bring in females, chase away Sneaker Males and sneak spawns. Sneaker Males hang near active nests and sneak spawns.  Females spawn in multiple nests over the season and perform no parental care. 

Body Condition is an index that is calculated using: Weight/Standard Length ^ 3



HYPOTHESIS 1:

Body Condition (S. ocellatus) of the three Types of Males will differ.  This difference will be based upon fitness assumptions. We expct NM > SatM > SnM


(Null Hypothesis is assumed here)


STATISTICAL TESTS:

A One-Way ANOVA can be used to compare Body Condition of each group of fish by Type.





HYPOTHESIS 2:

Body Condition (S. ocellatus) for each Type of Male may differ for each group but also decrease during the course of the field season (or over time). 

(Null Hypothesis is assumed here)


STATISTICAL TESTS:

An ANCOVA (or analysis of covariance) can be used to compare Body Condition, by Type, across Time











